Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300009-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Surface Drainage* *1.0* *DEFINITION*
Surface drainage is the orderly removal of excess water from the surface of
land through improved natural channels or constructed ditches and through
shaping of the land. *2.0* *DRAINAGE SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION * 2.1 Open Channels
2.1.1 Open Ditch:A channel constructed to collect excess water and to conduct
it to a safe outlet. 2.1.2 Diversion Ditch: A channel constructed across the
slope of the land to intercept surface runoff. 2.1.3 Tile Drain Interceptor: A
channel located to collect water from a subsurface drainage outlet. 2.1.4 Dale
Ditch: A small channel excavated by a rotary ditcher on dykeland. 2.1.5 Vent
Ditch: A channel that collects water from dale ditches. 2.1.6 Inner Dyke Ditch:
A channel running parallel to a dyke. This ditch collects the water from vent
ditches and conducts it to a water control structure. 2.1.7 Common Main Drain:
A channel that serves as an outlet for a number of ditches from different
farms. 2.2 Land Shaping 2.2.1 Dykeland Forming: The crowning of marshland by
mechanical movement of soil to improve surface drainage and farmability. 2.2.2
Upland Forming: The process of cut and fill to eliminate major depressions in a
field resulting in increased runoff and improved drainage and farmability.
2.2.3 Land Levelling: Smoothing the land surface with a land leveller to
eliminate minor depressions in a field without changing the general topography.
*3.0* *GENERAL* 3.1 All surface drainage design and construction shall be in
accordance with the America Society of Agricultural Engineers Engineering
Practice - A.S.A.E. EP 302.2 - Design and construction of surface drainage
systems on farms in humid areas. 3.2 The system shall be designed as an
integral part of soil and water facilities, the farm layout, and cropping plan.
3.3 Good quality construction is essential for adequate drainage. Qualified
engineers should be responsible for surveys, designs, layout and checking to
guarantee that construction meets specifications. Land-owners and contractors
shall be provided with the information necessary for good quality construction.
3.4 Consideration shall be given to prevent excessive erosion resulting from
any surface drainage system. 3.5 The design and construction of agricultural
surface drainage systems shall comply with NB Department of Environment
Watercourse Alteration Regulations and guidelines and Regulation 90-80 and 90-
120 under the Clean Water Act as revised in 1993. 3.6 Surface drainage designed
and constructed as part of a system that diverts water runoff from its natural
outlet shall require the written permission of affected downstream or adjacent
landowners, or the Department of Transportation if road ditches are used. *4.0*
*OPEN DITCHING * 4.1 Open ditches shall normally be dug during the period of
June 1 to September 15 when there will normally be low flows of water thus
limiting the amount of sediment that can be transported. 4.2 The design ditch
bottom grade shall be no less than 0.05 percent. The maximum grade shall not
result in the design/permissible velocity being exceeded. 4.3 The ditch bottom
width shall be a minimum of 0.45m (1.5 ft.) and excavated to the lines and
grades as required to meet this standard. Banks should be free from projections
or other irregularities which will impede normal flow. Banks should be seeded
with a recommended grass mixture within three days of construction. 4.4 Open
ditch side slopes shall not exceed the following: *Soil* *Shallow Channels <
1.2m (4') in depth * *Deep Channels > 1.2m (4') in depth * **Peat and Muck
Vertical 0.25 : 1 Heavy Clay 0.5 : 1 1 : 1 Clay or Silt Loam 1 : 1 1.5 : 1
Sandy Loam 1.5 : 1 2 : 1 Loose Sand 2 : 1 3 : 1 4.5 The spoil from the ditch
excavation should be placed a minimum of 3.0m (10 ft) from the edge of the
ditch and shall be leveled to a maximum grade of less than 0.3m above original
ground. 4.6 Open ditches shall be designed to safely discharge the peak flow
resulting from a 10 year - 24 hour rainfall. The design peak flow shall be
increased in critical areas (municipal/housing areas, etc.). 4.7 The design
discharge used to determine the open ditch capacity shall be calculated using
the USDA-SCS EFM2 method or the TR55 method. 4.8 On steep grades, or highly
erodible soils, or also where the design peak discharge and/or design velocity
is greater than the permissible, the ditch shall be designed with a stone
center, appropriate erosion control matting or other systems to safely
discharge peak flow. 4.9 Settling basins should be installed to allow the water
to slow down and any silt to settle out. The dimensions of the settling basin
shall be a minimum of 0.6m (2 ft) deeper than the ditch bottom, a length
equivalent to ten ditch bottom widths, and a width of two times the ditch
bottom width. The side slopes of the settling basin should be the same as the
ditch. 4.10 Any culvert to be installed in an open ditch shall meet the
following criteria: 4.10.1 Minimum diameter of culvert to be 150mm (6"). 4.10.2
Culverts shall be manufactured of galvanized steel, concrete or high density
polyethylene and meet the following standard: 4.10.2.1 Galvanized steel CSA G
401-M 81 4.10.2.2 Concrete CSA A 257.3 M 1982 - for 150 mm
D.> 300 mm CSA 257.2 M 1982 - for 300 mm
D.> 3700 mm 4.10.2.3 High density polyethylene ASTM F 667 - 87 A - for 150 mm
D.> 400 mm AASHTO M 294 - 851 - for 400 mm
D.> 750 mm 4.10.3 The culvert diameter shall be designed to safely discharge
the peak flow resulting from a 10 year - 24 hour rainfall. The design peak flow
shall be increased in critical areas (municipal/housing areas, etc.). 4.10.4
Culverts shall be backfilled in a manner to prevent erosion, settling, culvert
damage and to permit safe crossing. 4.11 A buffer strip of 2.0m (6.5 ft) should
be maintained parallel to the ditch banks. Tillage operations should not be
carried out within this zone. Livestock access should also be denied within
this zone to prevent the breakdown of the ditch banks. Side Slope Figure 1.
Typical Open Ditch Cross Section. *5.0* *DYKELAND FORMING * 5.1 The field area
contained in one land form, which is the area of land located between the
center-line of the runs on either side of the crown and the ends of the form,
shall be no less than 0.8 hectares (2.0 acres) unless the total maximum length
of the form as determined by the project engineer and must be less than 152.4m
(500 feet). 5.2 The width of a single form, which is the perpendicular distance
measured from the center-line of one run to the center-line of the nearest run,
shall be no less than 36.6m (120.0 feet) and no greater than 3.0% of the full
length of the land form. slpoe *Figure 2. Typical Dykeland Forming Cross
Section.* 5.3 Land forms within the same field shall be constructed parallel to
each other and shall be as close to rectangular in shape as possible. 5.4 The
side slope of the crown of a land form is measured from the average level of
the run or top of the run ditch to the average level of the center of the crown
and shall be no less than 2.0% and no greater than 3.0% for the full length of
the land form. 5.5 Land forms shall be constructed according to the lines and
grades established by the project engineer or designate. Crowning shall be
constructed so all crowns are free of pockets or depressions. Crowns shall be
land smoothed after rough construction. 5.6 Land smothers (land leveler) shall
be passed over the field surface at least 3 times as a finishing operation. The
first two passes shall be on opposite diagonals and the last pass shall be in
the row direction. 5.7 Grading shall be checked prior to and following
finishing operations. A tolerance of 30 mm (0.1 ft) may be allowed in checking,
providing there are no reverse grades in row direction. 5.8 Land form run
ditches shall be constructed to a minimum depth of 0.3m (1.0 ft) and shall
drain freely. *6.0* *UPLAND FORMING * 6.1 Topsoil shall be removed from both
the cut and fill areas prior to subsoil movement. 6.2 Low areas shall be filled
and graded as required to improve surface drainage. 6.3 Topsoil shall be
replaced and levelled to final grades. *7.0* *PROJECT COMPLETION * 7.1 Upon
notification of project completion, the project engineer or designate will
carry out final inspection and report of the site. 7.2 Projects will only be
consider complete if they meet these standards and work is suitable to the
project engineer or designate. *The New Brunswick Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Aquaculture reserves the right to revise the above standard at
any time.* --------------------------------------------------------------------
---- ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
