Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300002-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Conservation Tillage* Over 70% of
New Brunswick's agricultural land has physical limitations due to compacted
subsoil and poor structure (45.5%); steep topography (20.8%) and shallowness to
bedrock (5.8%). In order for this land to achieve its productive potential, a
proper level of management inputs is required. In addition to these inherent
problems associated with the land base, erosion by water has become the main
concern in the potato producing areas of the St. John River Valley. The major
factors that have increased the risk of soil degradation are: * Monoculture or
indifferent crop rotation with minimum use of cover crops. * The use of heavy
equipment on wet land. * Exessive stone removal. * Up and down the hill farming
on steep topography. * Excessive, untimely and the use of unsuited tillage
equipment. * Minimum use of barnyard and green manures. Our goal is now,
therefore, to reduce soil erosion and keep water in the soil while improving
overall crop production and productivity. Conservation tillage offers an
opportunity towards achieving this goal without imposing too many changes to
our production systems. Concerns over excessive soil erosion necessitate
increased efforts at maintaining crop residues on the soil surface through
conservation tillage. ---------------------------------------------------------
--------------- *What is Conventional Tillage?* -------------------------------
----------------------------------------- Conventional tillage is a full
tillage program combining primary and secondary tillage operations performed in
preparing a seedbed for a given crop and area. Primary tillage is performed in
the fall (or spring) with a mouldboard plow followed in the spring by secondary
tillage (disking (twice) or disking and the use of a vibrashank or soil
finisher or rotovator or spring tooth and spike tooth harrows). The system
performs as indicated below: * Inverts the soil to form furrows. * Buries crop
residues so that there is slow decay and no surface mulch effect. * Exposes
bare soil to water and wind erosion. May compact the soil beneath the plow. *
Minimal ridging effect. * High cost per acre. * Power requirement of 15 h.p.
per plow bottom. * Ideal for sod ground. --------------------------------------
---------------------------------- *What is Conventional Tillage?* ------------
------------------------------------------------------------ Conservation
tillage is any tillage system that reduces the number of passes over the field
for land preparation and increases the surface residues to protect soil and
water loss. The system includes single disking, chiselling, subsoiling, ridging
and no-till. No-till, however, has not, up to this time, proven a viable
alternative in New Brunswick, -------------------------------------------------
----------------------- *Equipment Frequently Associated With Conservation
Tillage:* ---------------------------------------------------------------------
--- *The Subsoiler:* This consists of rigid steel shanks which do not invert
the soil. * Pre-tillage operation. * Breaks up compacted layers 16"(40 cm) or
more below soil surface. * Allows deep percolation of water. * Allows deeper
root penetration. * Requires 30 h.p. per shank. Ideal where drainage tiles have
been installed. * Must be done when the subsoil is dry. * A rigid Shank. Diesel
fuel requirements: * Subsoiler - 2.1 gal/ac for loams (23.581/ha) * - 2.84 gal/
ac for clays. (31.89 I/ha) *The Offset Disk:* This implement consists of large
concave disks mounted in two rows opposing each other. The gongs cut and throw
the soil in opposite directions. o Primary tillage operation. o Breaks up soil
to 8-10" (20-25 cm). o Shallow incorporation of residues for rapid decay. o
Good surface mulch effect for erosion reduction, o Low cost per acre. o 12-14
h.p. needed per foot width. Diesel fuel requirements: o 0.95 gal/ac for loams
(10.67 I/ha) o 1.28 gal/ac for clays (14.37 I/ha) *The Chisel Plow* This
implement consists of multiple rows of staggered curved shanks mounted rigidly,
with spring cushions, or with spring resets. o Primary tillage operation. o
Breaks up soil to 8-10" (20-25 cm). o Shallow 'incorporation of residues for
rapid decay. o Good surface mulch effect for erosion reduction. o Low cost per
acre. o Good ridging effect. o Minimal compaction. o Operating speed 5 mph or
higher, o Requires 15 h.p. per shank Diesel fuel requirements: o - .1.25 gal/ac
for loams (14.04 I/ha) o - 1.69 gal/ac for clays (18.98 I/ha) *The Coulter
Chisel Plow* This implement consists of chis~el plows with gangs of flat or
concave disks preceding the shanks to cut surface residues and vegetation. o
Primary tillage operation. o Breaks up soil to 8-10 in, (20-25 cm). o Shallow
residue incorporation. o Good surface mulch effect for erosion reduction. o
Good ridging effect. o Minimal compaction. o Low cost/acre. o Requires 15 h.p.
per shank. o Operating speed 5 mph The Coulter Chisel Plow or higher. Diesel
fuel requirements: o - 1.30 gal/ac for loams (14.60 I/ha) o - 1.70 gal/ac for
clays (19.09 1/ha) ------------------------------------------------------------
------------ *Conservation Tillage Systems* -----------------------------------
------------------------------------- A prerequisite for any conservation
tillage program requires a building up and balancing of soil nutrients and the
judicious use of limestone to adjust soil pH, based on soil tests. With
conservation tillage, all residues from a harvesting operation including straw
and chaff on sloping land must be evenly distributed over the acreage being
treated. Stubble cannot be plowed down at a time when erosion is likely to be
most severe. However, the stubble may be chisel plowed or vibrashanked with one
pass across the slope in the fall. The following systems may be considered in a
conservation tillage system. o *Fall vibrashank, spring vibrashank *- this
provides shallow incorporation or residues for rapid decay, maximum surface
mulch effect, minimal compaction, minimal ridging effect and low cost per acre.
This should be used only on potato fields or clean-tilled grain fields where
straw has been chopped and scattered. o *Fall disking, spring disking^1 *- this
provides shallow incorporation of crop residues for rapid decay, good surface
mulch effect, good ridging effect, minimal compaction, low cost per acre and
can be used only on potato fields, or clean-tilled grain where straw has been
chopped and scattered. o *Fall chisel plow, spring vibrashank^l - *this
provides shallow incorporation of crop residues for rapid decay, good surface
mulch effect, good ridging effect, minimal compaction, low cost per acre and
can be used only on potato fields, or clean-tilled grain where straw has been
chopped and scattered. o *Fall coulter chisel plow, spring vibrashank^1 *-this
allows shallow residue incorporation for rapid decay, good surface mulch
effect, good ridging effect, minimal compaction, low cost per acre and can be
used on all but sod fields. o *Fall subsoiling *- on severely compacted ground
subsoiling will break up compacted layers beneath the normal tillage zone to
improve percolation of water. A conservation tillage system would also involve
planting a cover crop (winter cereal) on land which was left bare in the fall.
*NOTE:* Before you decide on a tillage system or the purchase of new tillage
implements, you should develop a Soil Management Plan for your forming
operations reflecting the needs of your farm. The plan should tell the previous
usages of the soil, the present status of the soil, what future use will be and
what needs to be done to achieve these objectives. *Benefits of Conservation
Tillage over Conventional Tillage:* Reduction of soil erosion and nutrient loss
from soil erosion as is evident in this table below. o Increased retention of
soil moisture. o Increased infiltration. o Increased O.M. content in soil. o
Increased soil surface protection from crop residues. o Lower cost per acre. o
Decreased compaction. ---------------------------------------------------------
--------------- *Problems Associated With Conservation Tillage* ---------------
--------------------------------------------------------- o Tractor speeds must
be greater than 5 mph to effectively plow the field and achieve the desired
ridging effect. o Losses of N by denitrification and/or volatilization are
potential problems that require some more research. The increased moisture,
surface residue and reduced bulk density with conservation tillage are more
conducive to denitrification losses. o As soil mixing is reduced, both P and K
should, be applied in the row at planting. The row K is especially important in
soils that compact easily. o Lime must be applied as required by soil tests, to
prevent the formation of an acid surface layer that could reduce herbicide
activity, root development and nutrient availability. o Populations of
Rhizoctonia solani in topsoil survive in colonized plant debris, Deep turning
the soil (20-30 cm) with a mouldboard plow which buries the debris, effectively
removes the fungal populases from the root zone. In contrast, chisel plows,
etc. leave most of the plant debris and the pathogen in the topsoil. Thus,
seedling tissues may come into contact with the pathogen and be invaded a few
days after planting, resulting in poor stands or deformed plants. *Current weed
control practices are less effective under conservation tillage.* -------------
----------------------------------------------------------- *Why Change From
Conventional Tillage to Conservation Tillage?* --------------------------------
---------------------------------------- Some farmers may resist change in
tillage practices even though economic and other benefits (e.g. reduced soil
erosion) indicate a need for change, because they feel their current methods
are successful. Certainly, change solely for the sake of change can be
counterproductive. One must look at the overall cropping system to determine if
a change is needed, and if so, what that change should be. Some factors to
consider in this regard are: o Is soil erosion a major concern on your farm
operation? o Are you experiencing reduced yields? o Is soil compaction becoming
a major problem on your farm? o Are high operational costs eating away at your
profits? o Are you carrying out a review of your equipment needs? o Is the
organic matter level content of your soil being depleted? *If the answers to
the above questions are yes, then you should consider Conservation Tillage.*
There are many benefits to be achieved through conservation tillage but
successful application of conservation tillage systems requires good management
by the farmer. Yield reductions could result if fertility and other management
programs are neglected. -------------------------------------------------------
----------------- *More Information* ------------------------------------------
------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------
------------------------ ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
