Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300012-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Terrace* *1.0* *DEFINITION* Terraces
are earth embankments, channels or combination of embankment and channels
constructed across the slope to reduce the slope length at suitable spacing and
with acceptable grades for one or more of the following purposes: * To reduce
soil erosion by water * To provide for maximum retention of moisture for crop
use * To remove surface water at a non-erosive velocity * To improve
topographic conditions and farmability * To reduce sediment content in runoff
water * To reduce peak runoff rates to installations downstream * To improve
water quality *2.0* *GENERAL* 2.1 All terrace system design and construction
shall be in accordance with the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Engineering Practice - ASAE S268.3 - Design, Layout, Construction and
Maintenance of Terrace Systems and as specified in the following. 2.2 The NB
Department of Environment Watercourse Alteration Regulations and Guidelines
will apply to all projects including Regulation 90-80 and 90-120 under the
Clean Water Act as revised in 1993. 2.3 To adequately control erosion on
sloping land terraces are used in conjunction with other water control systems,
such as: grassed waterways, underground outlets, drop structures, and sediment
control basins. Complementary conservation practices are usually recommended in
conjunction with terrace systems such as: contour farming, crop rotation,
contour strip cropping, conservation tillage, residue management and good soil
management. 2.4 The most common type of terrace system used in New Brunswick is
the Parallel Variable Grade Diversion Terrace (PVGDT) system. This system
concept was adapted to New Brunswick and is very similar to the narrow-base-
terrace recommended in the ASAE standard: ASAE S268.3. Design, layout,
construction and maintenance of terrace systems are also in accordance with
Chapter 8, "Terraces" of the USDA-SCS, Engineering Field Manual Handbook for
Conservation Practices. 2.5 Parallel Bench Terraces (PBT) and Parallel Rigeless
Diversion Terraces (PRDT) are constructed occasionally where conditions apply.
PRDT's may be used on uniform slopes (<6%) and for short lengths. These types
of terrace systems are also combined with grassed or rock-lined waterway
outlets, or specially designed pipe outlets. *3.0* *SPACING* 3.1 Terraces shall
be constructed at recommended spacing using the Universal Soil Loss Equation
(USLE) to meet acceptable soil loss tolerance levels which were set for New
Brunswick at a maximum of 9t/ha/yr (4 t/ac/yr). 3.2 Terrace spacing design
shall consider the soil - crop management and conservation practices used by
the landowner. Where no comprehensive crop management exists, use the most
intensive land use rotation for spacing design. 3.3 Terraces shall not be
constructed at a spacing less than 36 meters (40 rows - 36" per row). 3.4 Final
spacing must be adjusted to multiples of present and expected future row crop
equipment widths (i.e. 4-row planter, 20-row sprayer). Ideally, spacing should
allow for an even number of passes of each piece of equipment. *4.0*
*ALIGNMENT* 4.1 Terrace system alignment shall be planned for compatibility
with modern farm equipment and beneficial to soil and water conservation. The
design must consider the natural features, permanent boundaries, runoff
disposal outlets, and location of auxiliary factors, such as fences, and field
roads. 4.2 The farmable row lengths in a terrace system shall be a minimum of
200 meters to maintain a high efficiency of machinery operation. 4.3 Diversion
terraces shall be parallel to each other. Curves should be long and gentle to
accommodate farm machinery. Land forming, necessary cuts and fills and
variations in grade shall be used to maintain proper alignment and a parallel
system. *5.0* *CHANNEL GRADE * 5.1 Channel grades shall range from 0.5% to 2%
for the key-diversion terrace line in the terrace system. The slope may be
increased up to 3% for a length less than 75 m (250 ft) when required to
improve alignment and farmability. *6.0* *CAPACITY & CROSS SECTION * 6.1 The
diversion terrace shall have enough capacity to control runoff from a 1 in 10
year frequency, 24-hour storm without overl topping Terrace systems designed
for sediment or flood control shall have enough capacity to control a storm of
higher frequency consistent with the potential hazard involved. The S.C.S. -
E.F.M.H. method, or any equivalent method, is recommended for designing
capacity and cross-section. 6.2 The design discharge used to determine the
terrace capacity shall be calculated using the USDA-SCS EFM2 method or the TR55
method. 6.3 PVGDT's shall have a minimum freeboard of 0.3 meter and PRDT's a
minimum freeboard of 0.1 meter to prevent over topping 6.4 Terrace cross-
sections shall be as shown in figures 1 and 2. Terrace width shall range from 4
to 8 metres; width may be adjusted for slippage and other topographic
conditions to improve farmability. *7.0* *PLANNING SYSTEM LAYOUT * 7.1 Terrace
systems should be planned with the aid of a topographic survey used to generate
a topographic contour map with maximum 1.0 meter contours. If a survey cannot
be completed topographic maps at scales 1:1000, 1:1200, or 1:2400 shall be used
to determine the optimum system layout. The recommended contour interval for
design purposes will vary from 0.5 to 1.0 meter. If topographic maps at these
scales are not available the minimum scale to be used shall be 1:4800 or better
for general layout pattern. *8.0* *CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE * 8.1 Terraces
shall be properly limed, fertilized and seeded with a conservation grass
mixture and maintained with a permanent, weed-free sod. 8.2 Terrace outlets
shall be protected with an erosion control mat where required to prevent damage
to the terrace channel. 8.3 Topsoil shall be saved during construction and
placed over the terrace in the final construction phase to facilitate good
grass growth/sod cover. 8.4 Terraces shall be properly compacted at low,
critical areas to prevent breaching and erosion of berm. *9.0* *PROJECT
COMPLETION * 9.1 Upon notification of project completion, the project engineer
or designate will carry out final inspection and report of the conservation
site. 9.2 Terrace projects will only be consider complete if they meet these
standards and work is suitable to the project engineer or designate. *10.0*
*REFERENCES* 10.1 The Atlantic Committee on Agricultural Engineering (A.C.A.E.)
Publication No. 26, 1992 - Integrated Erosion Control on Potato Land in
Atlantic Canada contains additional information on rationale, methods and
equipment and should be referred to prior to commencing a terracing project.
10.1 Watercourse Alteration Guidelines issued by the N.B. Department of
Environment. *The New Brunswick Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Aquaculture reserves the right to revise the above standard at any time.* *Fig.
1 & 2. Typical Diversion Terrace Cross Sections* ------------------------------
------------------------------------------ ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-
mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
