Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300013-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Water and Sediment Control Basins*
Water and sediment control basins are used as a method to minimize soil
erosion. They are effective in preventing bank and gully erosion by collecting
and storing sediment along with other waterborne debris. Generally, they
prevent downstream erosion that can result from concentrated flows. Sediment
control basins are recognized as an effective Best Management Practice to
enhance and improve water quality. They are often referred to as "bench-
terraces" or "floodwater storages for smaller drainage areas". Water and
sediment control basins consist of a berm, a ponding area and a pipe or tile
outlet. The berm is constructed across the slope of the land to provide a
temporary storage area for the surface runoff. Soil is piled and used to direct
water to a stabilized location. The ponded water is slowly discharged through
an underground outlet system. This eliminates erosive actions occurring further
down the slope and prevents damage to crop or other vegetation. A grassed
waterway, diversion or drop inlet may also be used in combination with the
water and sediment control basin as an effective soil conservation system. The
ponding process slows the water flow, allowing sediment and debris to settle
out before it reaches the drop inlet. The larger the storage basin the more
time available to enhance the proportion of settled sediment. This prevents the
undesirable deposition of silt on low lands or critical areas. Water and
sediment control basins reduce pollution by collecting silt, fine sand, wastes
and other debris. -------------------------------------------------------------
----------- *THE TWO MAIN TYPES OF SEDIMENT CONTROL BASINS.* ------------------
------------------------------------------------------ *(1) Narrow base berm
system* The narrow based berm system is the most economical as it usually takes
less material to construct. These berms can be used in areas where the land
slope is greater than 6%. The berm generally has a top width of approximately
1.2 m (4 feet). The structure has a back slope of 2:1 and a front slope of 3:
1 as illustrated in figure 1. This type of berm has steep side slopes, thus it
is not workable by farm machinery. Typical cross section of narrow-based berm *
(2) Bench-terrace basin* These steep back slope or bench-terrace berms are used
where the average land slope is 6% or less. The berm consists of a side slopes
of 8:1 and 2: 1. The front 8:1 side slope is workable by farm machinery. They
are commonly used in conservation systems which use a series of Bench-terraces
to collect and discharge runoff. Typical Cross Section of a Bench-Terrace -----
------------------------------------------------------------------- *DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS* ---------------------------------------------------------------
--------- 1. Determine the peak flow rate and the total incoming volume of
runoff for a 24 hour duration storm having a one in 10 year recurrence
frequency. A rule of thumb is that 50 m 3 (0.04 acre-ft) of storage is required
for each acre of the drainage area. These conditions are all dependent on the
watershed's characteristics. However, the temporary storage should have
sufficient capacity to accommodate all the runoff from a 2 year frequency - 24
hour duration storm. 2. The storage capacity of the sediment basin should take
into consideration a reduction in volume as a result of accumulated sediment .
Also a minimum freeboard of 0.3 m (1 ft.) should be added to the design height
of berm to prevent over topping Soil erosion prediction models such as USLE are
commonly used to estimate the annual soil loss. 3. The outlet and spillway
dimensions are generally sized based on peak flow and the basin's volume.
Generally, the outlet pipe is sized so that the ponding time is limited to less
than 24 hours, or depending on the crop tolerance to flooding. 4. Berm side
slopes in Sandy Soils should not exceed 1:3 and 1:2 in Clay Soils. If berms are
being cropped the location of the pipe inlet has to take into consideration the
size of the farm equipment. 5. Where multiple berms or collection basins are
connected to a common outlet tile the pressure and velocities may become
excessive. Tile sizing and materials must consider discharge capacity, type of
flow control, and the intake rate. Intake rates can be controlled by
incorporating orifice control plates or specially selected intake structures.
6. The location of surface and subsurface drainage outlets must take into
consideration landscape features and adjacent property boundaries. Permission
must be obtained by downstream owners and in situations which may impact on
highways or within local municipalities. All outlets must be well protected and
designed according to the NBDARD /Subsurface Drainage Standards./ 7. Emergency
spillways are used to prevent water from over topping the berm. Some common
overflow structures include rockchutes and grassed waterways. 8. In areas where
rodents are a problem, wire mesh can be installed several inches below the
finished soil surface to reduce potential berm damage. ------------------------
------------------------------------------------ *CONSTRUCTION CONSIDERATIONS*
------------------------------------------------------------------------ *Site
Selection:* Water and sediment control basins should be located in an area that
will minimize interference with existing farm practices. The surface drainage
patterns in the area must be known, contour maps are useful. Soil
characteristics and the depth of soil layers are often required to determine
the site's potential. Sediment control basins should never be built on
potentially unstable soils. Thus, site location is an important factor in
determining the longevity of the structure. For example, all precautions should
be taken when locating a berm at the top edge of an existing gully. It may
become highly susceptible to future settlement and erosion of the berm. The
earth used for the construction of a berm should consist of at least 10% clay
and be stone free. The clay content creates an impermeable membrane for the
settling pond and minimizes seepage. If the soil characteristics of the earth
are inadequate, it may be advisable to transport suitable soil to the site.
*Construction techniques:* Ideally, the proposed pond area would provide the
earth required for berm construction. If the amount of fill from the pond area
is insufficient , fill from an alternate source will be needed. The available
fill on site should be managed so that the topsoil is excavated and stockpiled
for later use. The subsoil is then used in the berm construction process. The
topsoil is then replaced on the compacted subsoil layer of the newly
constructed berm and seeded appropriately. A minimum layer of 15 cm (6") of
topsoil is required to support vegetative growth. The berm should be
constructed similar to a dam except instead of holding water it holds back
soil. All subsurface outlets and standpipe inlets should be installed prior to
berm construction. The process of berm construction should be accompanied by
proper grade control to maintain a uniform, level structure. A bulldozer or
earth scraper may be used to transport and reshape the earth. The fill is
placed in 15 cm (6") layers and compacted. The height of the completed berm
should account for settlement, retention capacity and freeboard. To avoid soil
compaction of the surrounding crop land by heavy equipment during the
construction, of these water and sediment control basins, the soil should be in
a dry and workable condition. It is critical that the construction occur in the
summer or early fall to allow for the establishment of an adequate vegetative
cover on the berm. This practice will reduce the risk of rill and gully
erosion. ----------------------------------------------------------------------
-- *MAINTENANCE* --------------------------------------------------------------
---------- *It is more economical to fix a potential problem before a major
runoff event than to endure the consequences which may result from the
problem.* 1. The berm should be routinely inspected for cracks and settlement.
2. Both inlets and outlets should be inspected for obstructions such as debris
and silt and these should be removed. The ponding capacity should be monitored
and routinely cleaned as required to minimize the excessive build up of
sediment. 3. The emergency spillway may need maintenance after a large storm to
maintain proper elevation. If this becomes a frequent practice an improvement
or upgrading of the system's capacity may be required. 4. The vegetation of the
berm must be maintained with proper fertilization, lime application and annual
mowing. -----------------------------------------------------------------------
- *SUMMARY* -------------------------------------------------------------------
----- Sediment basins are considered as a practical Best Management Practice
used to control soil erosion and prevent the degradation of water quality by
protecting watercourses from excessive runoff and sediment from agricultural
land and/or barnyard runoff. Through minimizing the amount of sediment and
other waterborne debris in watercourses, water quality can be enhanced.
Siltation is minimized and the productive layer of soil is protected. By
improving your land base the capital and aesthetic value will be enhanced. Best
Management Practices have proven to be an effective means of reducing soil
erosion. ----------------------------------------------------------------------
-- ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
