Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300006-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Grassed Waterways* *1.0*
*DEFINITION* A natural or constructed channel shaped or graded to required
dimensions, and established in suitable vegetation for the safe disposal of
runoff water. Grassed waterways may be used alone or in combination with
diversion terraces and other structures to discharge surface runoff as part of
an erosion control system . *2.0* *GENERAL* 2.1 All grassed waterway design and
construction shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 "Grassed Waterways and
Outlets" of the USDA-SCS Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices
and as specified in the following: 2.2 The NB Department of Environment
Watercourse Alteration Regulations and Guidelines will apply to all projects
including Regulation 90-80 and 90-120 under the Clean Water Act as revised in
1993. *3.0* *PLANNING AND DESIGN * 3.1 The minimum capacity shall safely convey
the peak runoff expected from a 10 year frequency - 24 hour duration storm. If
the waterway is used as an outlet for a companion conservation structure or
within an urban / residential area the capacity will be increased to
accommodate a higher design frequency (25 yr. - 24 hr. duration storm). 3.2 The
design discharge used to determine the grassed waterway capacity shall be
calculated using the USDA-SCS EFM2 method or the TR55 method. 3.3 Generally,
the grassed waterway cross-section shall be parabolic to reduce meandering
risk. Trapezoidal grassed waterway cross-sections are recommended for steeper
slopes and for larger runoff discharge. See figure 1 - Typical waterway cross
sections. 3.4 The minimum grassed waterway depth shall be 0.3 m (1.0 ft). The
depth shall be increased as required to properly outlet diversion terraces and/
or other structures that are designed to outlet into the waterway and to assure
better row drainage. The recommended side slopes shall be 6:1 to 8:1 to improve
waterway crossing and farmability. 3.5 The maximum grassed waterway width shall
be less than 20 m (66 ft.) except where other suitable outlet locations or
methods cannot be found. The minimum width shall be greater than 6 meters (20
ft) where crossing with farm equipment is required. 3.6 Where the design peak
discharge of the grassed waterway is greater than 2.8 m^3 /s (100 cfs) and/or
the design velocity is greater than the permissible velocity, the waterway
shall be designed with a stone centre, non-degradable erosion control matting
or in combination with other special conservation structures as required to
safely discharge peak flow. 3.7 Subsurface drainage shall be installed as
required to eliminate continuous or base flow in the waterway and provide
proper conditions for vegetative growth. Drains shall be located on each side
of the waterway and not installed within the centre two-third width of the
waterway and shall. 3.8 Maximum permissible velocities shall be selected in
accordance to values specified in table below, recommended in S.C.S., E.F.M.H.
(Exhibit 7.3). *Cover* *Slope Range (%)* *Permissible Velocity* *Erosion
Resistant Soils m/s (ft/s) *** *Easily Eroded Soils m/s (ft/s)* Tall Fescue
Mixture (70%) <5 5-10 over 10 2.13 (7) 1.82 (6) 1.52 (5) 1.52 (5) 1.22 (4) 0.91
(3) Grass Mixture Reed Canary grass <5 5-10 1.52 (5) 1.22 (4) 1.22 (4) 0.91 (3)
Redtop Alfalfa Red Fescue <5 1.06 (3.5) 0.76 (2.5) 3.9 For waterways with
stone-lined centers, maximum permissible velocity in the above table may be
increased by 2 ft/s or the maximum permissible velocity for erosion resistant
soils maybe used. *4.0* *Construction and Maintenance: * 4.1 All trees,
brushes, stumps, obstructions and other objectionable material shall be removed
from the side and disposed of in a manner consistent with environmental
concerns and proper functioning of the waterway. 4.2 The waterway shall be
excavated or shaped to the lines and grades as required to meet this standard
and be free of bank projections or other irregularities which will impede
normal flow. 4.3 Topsoil shall be removed from excavation areas and replaced
during final grading as required to promote good vegetative growth. 4.4 Fill
shall be compacted or field rocks used as required to prevent excessive/unequal
settlement that would result in damage to the completed waterway. 4.5 Excessive
subsoil removed during waterway construction shall be used for land forming,
access road construction and/or stockpiled in an unused area outside of the
waterway. 4.6 Grassed waterways designed and constructed as part of a system
that diverts water runoff from its natural outlet shall require the written
permission of affected downstream or adjacent landowners, or the Department of
Transportation if road ditches are used. 4.7 A New Brunswick Watercourse
Alteration Permit may be required for waterways constructed that outlets
directly into a natural watercourse, such as a lake, river, or stream. 4.8 All
construction operations shall be performed as required to reduce soil erosion,
and shall be built in a period where seeding can take place prior to August 31
so adequate vegetative cover can be established to protect against fall and
spring runoff. If constructed after August 31, waterway must be protected with
appropriate erosion control matting to limit damage from runoff events until
vegetative cover can be established in the following summer season. 4.9 Erosion
control mats will be used in place of temporary ditches to encourage the proper
establishment of vegetative cover in the waterway. The width of the mat
installed shall be equal to the width of the waterway required to safely
discharge a 5 year - 24 hour storm. 4.10 The owner of the grassed waterway
shall be advised of other complementary soil conservation practices and of
grassed waterway maintenance procedures. 4.11 Grassed waterways shall be
properly limed, fertilized and seeded to recommended conservation grass mixture
and maintained with a permanent weed-free sod cover. Fig. 1. Typical waterway
cross sections. The New Brunswick Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Aquaculture reserves the right to revise the above standard at any time. ------
------------------------------------------------------------------ **
Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
