Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300007-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Land Clearing* *1.0* *DEFINITION*
Land clearing is the process of removing trees, stumps, brush, stones and other
obstacles from an area as required to increase the size of the crop producing
land base of an existing farm or to provide land for a new farm operation. The
newly cleared land must be ready for cultivation, including liming and leveling
to meet acceptable crop rotation and soil conservation goals. *2.0* *SITE
SELECTION * 2.1 Soil suitability for agricultural production will be determined
using NB Soil Survey Reports or may be determined by providing on-site soil
boring test holes (recommended 2 tests per acre) and a soil boring report
prepared indicating surface texture, depth to compact layer, depth to bedrock,
drainage capability, percent slope, percent stoniness, percent surface stone,
and percent rock outcrops. 2.2 Soils suitability will be based on the soil
report (Sec. 2.1) and the soil selection criteria in section 2.3. Soils having
components falling within the Not Recommended category of table in section 2.3
shall not be cleared. 2.3 Table - Soil Suitability Selection Criteria *SOIL
FACTORS * *GOOD* *FAIR* *NOT RECOMMENDED* Surface Texture Sandy Loam, Loam,
Silt Loam Loamy Sand, Clay Loam Sand, Gravel Silty Clay Loam Depth to Compact
Layer Greater than 40 cm 20 to 40 cm less than 20 cm Depth to Bedrock Greater
than 75 cm 40 to 75 cm less than 40 cm Drainage Well, Moderately Rapid,
Imperfect Poor Slope (%) Less than 5% 5% to 10% Greater than 10% Stoniness (%)
Less than 20% 20% to 30% Greater than 30% Surface Stone (%) Less than 0.1% 0.1%
to 3% Greater than 3% Rock Outcrops (%) 0% Less than 10% Greater than 10% 2.4
The Department reserves the right to carry out a Stem Analysis Evaluation as
specified in standard "Preliminary Stem Analysis for Agricultural Land Clearing
Projects" to determine stand category. *3.0* *GENERAL* 3.1 Land shall not be
cleared on slopes above 10% unless it can be fully integrated within an
existing erosion control (terracing) conservation system to prevent erosion
from the affected area. 3.2 Land cleared adjacent to an existing field shall
not increase the overall up and down field row length unless soil conservation
practices are implemented as required to prevent an increase in soil erosion
from the effected area. 3.3 Land shall not be cleared within _30 meters_ (100
ft) of a watercourse _unless approved by a NB Department of Environment
Watercourse Alteration Permit_. The NB Department of Environment Watercourse
Alteration Regulations and Guidelines will apply to all projects including
Regulation 90-80 and 90-120 under the Clean Water Act as revised in 1993. 3.4
All tree growth, stumps, large stones and other obstacles to the normal
operation of farm equipment shall be completely removed. The land shall be
sufficiently level to permit the normal operation of farm equipment and the
area must be ready for seed bed preparation. 3.5 Land clearing method shall
limit the loss of topsoil removed from the area being cleared. Debris piles
shall also be free from mud and topsoil (maximum allowance of 10% topsoil). 3.6
The location of the land shall be within a reasonable distance of the farm
base. 3.7 All debris must be in clean piles and disposed of by burning or
hauled to a disposal site as approved by the project engineer or designate
(preferably within the property boundary). 3.8 Whenever possible, wood debris
shall be disposed of by piling and burning within the clearing area. All
necessary permits for burning must be obtained. 3.9 Debris shall not be shoved
off to areas adjacent to the field being cleared. 3.10 Newly cleared land shall
be properly limed according to NBDARD Soil lab recommendations. *4.0* *CLEARING
METHODS * 4.1 For clearing standing timber, the method used shall be the walk-
down and pile; the uprooting and pile; or the cutting and pile method. 4.2 For
clearing clear-cut areas, the method used shall be the grubbing and piling; the
grubbing, piling, and turning; or the heavy moldboard plow or heavy breaking
disc method. 4.3 For clearing light growth and ground brush, the method used
shall be the grubbing and piling; the rotary or flail mower; the heavy
moldboard or breaking disc; or the rotary plow method. 4.4 Whatever the
clearing method used, debris piles shall be topsoil and mud free (maximum
allowance of 10%) and well packed to ensure that they can be easily burned or
loaded and hauled off the field. 4.5 Debris piles shall not be placed closer
than 30 meters (100 ft) to adjacent cleared or wooded areas. 4.6 The burning
method will be exempt only in designated regions where burning permits cannot
be obtained and will be reviewed on a case by case basis. *5.0* *CLEARING
EQUIPMENT * 5.1 Proper and well maintained industrial clearing equipment and
skilled operators shall be used for land clearing. 5.2 Piling blades used with
crawler tractors shall meet or exceed the NBDARD Piling Blade Standard. 5.3
Piling rakes used with excavators shall meet or exceed the NBDARD Piling Rake
Standard. 5.4 The primary land clearing equipment shall be one of the
following: 5.4.1 Crawler tractors with piling blades, cutting blades or earth
blades. Cutting blades shall be used only for cutting and piling method. Earth
blades shall only be used for walking-down standing timber. 5.4.2 Excavator
with piling rake. 5.5 Generally, auxiliary land clearing equipment shall be
breaking discs and breaking plows pulled by crawler tractors. 5.6 Generally
land clearing equipment used for debris cleanup operations shall be wheel
rakes, power drum rakes, specialized reel head rock pickers and debris pickers
powered by farm tractors. 5.7 Brush cutters (rotary brush mowers) powered by
farm tractors, may be used for clearing light growth and ground brush, if
normal cultivation can proceed after brush cutting. *6.0* *PROJECT COMPLETION *
6.1 Upon notification of project completion, the project engineer or designate
will carry out final inspection and report of land clearing site. 6.2 Land
clearing projects will only be consider complete if they meet these standards
and work is suitable to the project engineer or designate. *7.0* *REFERENCES*
7.1 The Atlantic Committee on Agricultural Engineering (A.C.A.E.) Publication
No. 7, 1985 - Land Clearing for Agricultural Production contains additional
information on clearing rationale, methods and equipment and should be referred
to prior to commencing a land clearing project. 7.2 Watercourse Alteration
Guidelines issued by the N.B. Department of Environment and Local Government.
*The New Brunswick Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Aquaculture
reserves the right to revise the above standard at any time.* -----------------
------------------------------------------------------- ** Agriculture and
Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
