Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300015-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Soil Erosion* ----------------------
-------------------------------------------------- *Prevention method to reduce
soil erosion* -----------------------------------------------------------------
------- Soil erosion is the process of detachment and movement of soil
particles. The degree of erosion is dependant on the soil's water infiltration
rate, water holding capacity, structural stability and the intensity and
duration of precipitation. The soil may be depleted of it's productivity as
surface runoff contains soil particles, nutrients and organic matter. This
surface runoff may cause rill erosion and more severe gully erosion if left
without proper control measures. Grassed waterways are used as a "Best
Management Practice" to enhance sediment control. They filter the sediment out
of the runoff keeping it on the field and out of watercourses. Grassed
waterways may be used alone to safely discharge surface runoff or in
combination with diversion terraces and other structures as part of an erosion
control system. Waterways are often constructed in natural depressions across
fields where water collects and flows to an outlet. Natural or constructed
waterways are broad and shallow vegetated channels (Photo 1.) that convey flows
across farmland toward a suitable outlet. Simple erosion control outlets such
as filter strips can also reduce soil erosion. photo A grassed waterway is
designed to safely dispose of the predicted runoff from the worst 24 hour
duration storm in 10 years. If the outlets were located within an urban /
residential area, a one in 25 year frequency - 24 hour duration storm is used.
Grassed waterways usually discharge into surface drains such as wooded areas or
watercourses. photo It ' is critical to design and construct non erosive
outlets. If a waterway outlet is discharged into an open ditch, a stream or
watercourse, various measures would have to be taken to dissipate the flow
energy and protect the outlet against erosion. Such measures include: * A rock
chute as indicated in photo 2 or: * A drop inlet structure as indicated in
figure 1. Typical drop inlet strcture Grassed waterways are beneficial on
cultivated areas where concentrated surface runoff occurs. When the design
discharge of the grassed waterway is greater than 2.8 m 3 Is (100 cfs) and/or
the design velocity is greater than the permissible velocity, the waterway
shall be designed with a stone centre or in combination with other special
conservation structures. Also permanent nondegradable erosion control mats, or
other systems can be used as required to safely discharge the peak flow.
Typical maximum permissible velocities are presented in table 1. Typical cross
section parabolic grass lined waterway ----------------------------------------
-------------------------------- *Shape of Grassed Waterways* -----------------
------------------------------------------------------- A grassed waterway
cross-section is generally parabolic (figure 2.) to reduce the risk of
meandering. Areas where steep slopes are prevalent may require trapezoidal
cross sections which are more efficient for larger runoff discharges. While the
trapezoidal is more difficult to construct and maintain, it is very effective
hydraulically. The recommended side slopes would be 6:1 to 8:1 to improve
waterway crossing and farmability. This slope slows the velocity and reduces
the soil erodibility. Maximum Permissible Velocities Table If waterways are too
long the water velocity may increase substantially due to the grade variation.
Rock lining the channel with rip rap or rock drop structures can dissipate
energy, so flow is maintained at nonerosive velocities. If the waterway is to
be crossed frequently, by farm equipment, subsurface or tile drainage may also
be required. Tiles would be offset from the centre one-quarter of the width and
run the length of one or both sides. The tile drain outlets should be offset
from the waterway outlet. -----------------------------------------------------
------------------- *Size of Grassed Waterways* -------------------------------
----------------------------------------- The size of the waterway will vary
according to the amount of runoff it must transport and if it is used as an
outlet for a companion conservation structure. The minimum grassed waterway
depth shall be 0.3m (1.0 ft). The depth should be increased to properly outlet
diversion terraces and/or other structures that are designed to discharge into
the grassed waterway and permit adequate row drainage. The minimum width shall
be greater than 8m (26 ft) to improve farmability, such as seeding, mowing, and
machine crossing. The maximum width is usually less than 20m (66 ft) except
where other suitable outlet locations or methods cannot be found. -------------
----------------------------------------------------------- *Time of
construction, seeding and initial protection* ---------------------------------
--------------------------------------- Grassed waterways must be constructed
and seeded prior to the end of August to establish adequate vegetative cover to
resist the erosive flows of fall and spring runoff. If constructed in the fall
netting is strongly recommended to limit spring damage. The construction of the
waterway should begin when it can be completed in a relatively short period of
time and when the soil is workable, not too wet. The timing should create the
least amount of interference with adjacent crops, as well waterways should be
constructed perpendicular to the direction of cultivation to avoid herbicide
damage to the vegetative cover in the waterway. Waterways should be seeded with
a grass mix that spreads by rhizomes. A recommended mix for the New Brunswick
potato belt soils is 70% tall fescue, 20% creeping red fescue, and 10% red top.
This grass mix has been successful when broadcast seeded at a rate of 55 kg/ha
(50 lb./acre). In most cases lime will be necessary to instease the pH of the
soil, and an adequate fertilizer should be added. Other mixes may be adopted in
poorly drained soils, such as a Reed canary grass and red top mix. To provide
quick vegetative cover it is recommended to under seed the mix with a cereal.
If seeding is done before the end of July use a spring cereal, otherwise use a
winter cereal. The seeding rate should be 70 kg/ha (60 lb./acre). The spreading
of straw mulch over the seeded waterway can provide protection against untimely
runoff events. Erosion control mats are becoming more and more popular and can
provide temporary erosion protection during the establishment of vegetative
cover. They are very effective in maintaining a waterway in situations where
heavy rainfalls are encountered before the seed has had a chance to develop.
The mats reduce erosion problems by significantly reducing the erosive forces
of rainfall and runoff on the soil surface while enhancing seed germination and
vegetative cover. There are several types of matting available such as
biodegradable and non biodegradable mats consisting of such materials as nylon,
coconut fiber, straw mulch, jute, etc. ----------------------------------------
-------------------------------- *Construction and maintenance* ---------------
--------------------------------------------------------- Recommended equipment
for the construction of waterways include: road graders, land levellers, dump
trucks, and bulldozers. Farm tillage equipment may be used in the final
smoothing operation and seedbed preparation. When preparing the water way for
seeding do not till up and down along its length. This may lead to the
development of rills and decrease the waterway's stability. -------------------
----------------------------------------------------- *Benefits of Grassed
Waterways* --------------------------------------------------------------------
---- There is nothing more wasteful than a raw gully dividing productive
farmland. Grassed waterways are part of the Best Management Practices for
Sediment control. They improve the productive value of farmland while taking up
minimal space and they are,an environmentally sound practice. -----------------
------------------------------------------------------- *Recommended
Construction Procedures* ------------------------------------------------------
------------------ 1. Grassed waterways designed and constructed as part of a
system to control water runoff, requires the written permission of affected
downstream or adjacent landowners, or the Department of Transportation if road
ditches are used. 2. A Watercourse Alteration Permit may be required for
waterways constructed such that the outlet is directed into a natural
watercourse, such as a lake, river, or stream. 3. All trees, brush,
obstructions and other material should be removed from the site and disposed of
in a manner, consistent with environmental regulations and the proper
functioning of the waterway. 4. The waterway should be excavated or shaped to
the grades and dimensions according to the design plan and the survey layout.
They should also be free of bank projections or other irregularities which will
impede normal flow. 5. The topsoil should be removed from the excavation areas
and be stockpiled. A minimum depth of 15 cm of this topsoil should be replaced
when the final grading takes place. This is done to promote vegetative growth.
6. Any fill should be compacted or field rocks be used to prevent excessive/
unequal settlement that would result in damage to the waterway. 7. Any
excessive subsoil that was removed during waterway construction should be used
for land forming, in adjacent fields to improve row drainage, access road
construction and/or stockpiled in an unused area outside of the waterway. 8.
Grassed waterways should be properly limed, fertilized and seeded with the
recommended conservation grass mixture and maintained with a permanent weed
free sod cover and should be mowed twice a year to help thicken the sod. 9. All
construction operations are to be performed as required to reduce soil erosion.
Construction should be done when appropriate seeding is possible to protect
against fall and spring runoff. 10. Erosion control mats should be used in
place of temporary ditches to encourage the proper establishment of vegetative
cover in the waterway. The width of the mat installed should be equal to the
width of the waterway required to safely discharge a 5 year - 24 hour storm.
11. Grassed waterways should not be used as travel lanes for either cattle or
farm machinery. Any small tracking that develops can turn into a gully and
destroy the waterway. 12. The importance of the design and construction of non
erosive outlets cannot be stressed enough. The outlets may be protected through
the use of rip rap or other energy dissipaters (Photo 2). 13. Routine
maintenance should be done annually to repair any small rills with appropriate
patching and seeding before the waterway becomes damaged from concentrated
flows. -----------------------------------------------------------------------
- ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
