Agriculture, Pêche et Aquaculture *Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture* *
*Home | *
www.gnb.ca/0027/index-e.asp> *Français* <0173300008-f.asp>* New Brunswick's
Provincial Flower: The Violet (Viola cucullata) New Brunswick's Provincial
Bird: The Chickadee (Parus atricapillus) * Stream Bank Protection* *1.0*
*DEFINITION* Stream bank protection is the process of placing material along a
bank of a watercourse for the purpose of erosion control to prevent the loss of
bank material and property adjacent to the banks of the watercourse. *2.0*
*GENERAL* 2.1 This standard was generally derived from the Watercourse
Alterations Technical Guidelines of the NB Department of Environment. 2.2 The
NB Department of Environment Watercourse Alteration Regulations and Guidelines
will apply to all projects including Regulation 90-80 and 90-120 under the
Clean Water Act as revised in 1993. 2.3 Erosion control works shall be placed
along the bank of the watercourse in such a manner as will keep encroachment
into the main channel, incised channels and the flood plain to a minimum. 2.4
Any construction due to the erosion control work shall be evaluated for
backwater effects, increase velocity, redirection of flow and scour effects.
2.5 The foundation of erosion control works shall be designed so that there
will be no embankment failures. The possible scour depth below the protective
works should be evaluated. 2.6 The material used for erosion control works must
not come from the bed of the watercourse and shall be clean, inorganic, non-
ore-bearing and non-toxic. Necessary filter layers shall be incorporated to
prevent loss of fine material. 2.7 Erosion control works should be designed to
withstand water forces from buoyancy, high velocity, wave action. The forces
due to ice movement must also be evaluated in the design. 2.8 Rip rap shall
meet the minimum size and gradings in tables 1 and 2. The largest stone size
shall be 1.5 times the D_50 and the minimum thickness of rip rap shall be 2.5
times the D_50 . 2.9 Some materials used for stream bank protection are: Good
grass/sod cover; Rip-rap; Rock filled wire baskets and/or timber cribs; Filter
cloths; Concrete blocks of various shapes; Stone (sloped and graded as per
design);Wood, concrete and steel linings. 2.10 Following construction a 5.0m
(16 ft) riparian zone or buffer strip should be established along the
watercourse banks. Cultivation and livestock access should be restricted from
this area. A vegetative cover should be established with plants capable of
having dense growth and fibrous roots and provide complete soil cover. 2.11
Many techniques are used for controlling erosion such as rock placement,
retaining walls and jetties. In the Maritimes the most common method is a rock
slope protection. For this type of erosion control, the design should be
carried out using the extensive literature on the subject so the proper size(s)
and slope(s) can be determined. *3.0* *Construction* 3.1 Before any stream bank
protection project is initiated it is imperative that a watercourse alteration
permit by granted by the NB Department of Environment. 3.2 Construction should
be accomplished in July, August or September whenever possible and in a manner
planned to keep sediment loss from the work site to a minimum. 3.3 Rip rap
shall be placed on the banks with machinery capable of controlling the drop of
the rock, rather than dumped over the edge of the bank. 3.4 The rip rap should
be angular in shape, hard, and resistant to weathering. 3.5 Rip rap shall be
placed immediately following preparation of banks. 3.6 Prior to placement of
rip rap, banks should be graded to a uniform slope no greater than 1.5
horizontal to 1 vertical. See figure 1. - Typical cross section of rip rap
stream bank protection. 3.7 Filter layers of either 150 mm (6") of well graded
gravel {fine sands through 75 mm (3") stones with no stones exceeding 150 mm
(6")} or geotextile filter fabric shall be placed on graded bank prior to the
placement of rip rap to prevent the loss of bank material through the voids in
the rip rap. 3.8 The minimum thickness of the rip rap shall be 1.5 times the
maximum stone size (or 2.25 times the D_50 ). 3.9 The rip rap shall be
deposited to the full thickness in one operation and placed as a dense, well
graded mass of stone with minimal voids. 3.10 Rip rap shall be anchored at the
base of the existing bank by placing the bottom of the rock in a trench
excavated to a depth at least equal to the height of the largest rock. *Figure
1.Typical cross section of Rip Rap Stream Bank Protection The New Brunswick
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Aquaculture reserves the right to
revise the above standard at any time.* *Table 1.Suggested Minimum Rip-Rap
Gradings for Stream Bank Protection.* /*Class I */ Nominal 12 inches diameter
or 80 lb. weight. Allowable local velocity up to 10 ft/sec. Grading
Specification: 100% smaller than 18 inches or 300 lb at least 20% larger than
14 inches or 150 lb at least 50% larger than 12 inches or 80 lb at least 80%
larger than 8 inches or 25 lb /*Class II */ Nominal 20 inches diameter or 400
lb. weight. Allowable local velocity up to 13 ft/sec. Grading Specification:
100% smaller than 30 inches or 1500 lb at least 20% larger than 24 inches or
700 lb at least 50% larger than 20 inches or 400 lb at least 80 % larger than
12 inches or 70 lb /*Class III */ Nominal 30 inch diameter or 1500 lb weight.
Allowable local velocity up to 15 ft/sec. Grading Specification: 100% smaller
than 48 inches or 5000 lb at least 20% larger than 36 inches or 2500 lb at
least 50% larger than 30 inches or 1500 lb at least 80% larger than 20 inches
or 400 lb */Note/ *the percentages quoted are by weight; the sizes quote are
equivalent spherical diameters, = 1.24 volume;< /FONT > */The relative density
is assumed to be in the range 2.4 to 2.9. /* *Table 2. Rip rap Minimum D_50
Sizing Chart.* *Water Velocity (feet / second) * *Rock D_50 (inches)* *Rock
Weight (pounds)* 5 4 3 6 6 10 7 8 24 8 10 47 9 12 81 10 15 158 11 18 273 12 20
375 13 24 650 14 27 925 15 30 1268 16 35 2013 ---------------------------------
--------------------------------------- ** Agriculture and Aquaculture E-mail
www.gnb.ca/0027/sendmail-e.asp> | Contacts
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.137.html> | ** *Disclaimer
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/disclaimer.html>* | *Privacy Statement
www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/admin/privacy.html>*
